                            DETECTING SCHIZOPHRENIA THROUGH EYE MOVEMENT ANALYSIS USING
                                        ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS

In recent years, machine learning has gained huge traction. Researchers have
continuously applied machine learning to new fields to unravel the complex patterns
within huge and complex datasets. Machine learning approaches have been successfully
applied in the field of computer vision to learn from any existing patterns in images and
classify previously “unseen” images. Recently, machine learning has been used in the
medical field in the context of disease diagnosis. In this study, we will use machine
learning to distinguish healthy subjects from those suffering from schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia affects the neurotransmitters of the brain, thus impairing the neural
connectivity of the patient, resulting in various psychotic symptoms. It not only affects
the patient, but there is a certain risk that their relatives might develop this disease as
well. Symptoms of schizophrenia can be controlled with early detection of the disease.
We use eye-movement recording to obtain measures for distinguishing schizophrenic
patients from healthy controls using a deep neural network, which could assist in early
detection of the disease and thereby make a difference to the lives of millions of people.

What is Schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia is a serious mental illness. It limits a person’s
ability to react to the social situation happening around him.
Schizophrenic people typically realize the occurrence of such
events but are indifferent to them. They are mostly socially or
emotionally disconnected.

Schizophrenia was first described by the father of modern
psychiatry, Emil Kraepelin. He named schizophrenia as
dementia praecox which implied a progressively deteriorating
illness. The term schizophrenia was coined later by Bleuler.

What Causes Schizophrenia?
 Environment
 Brain Chemistry
 Substance Use
 Genetics
 
Why did We Study Schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia is not a terribly common disease but it is a serious and typically
chronic one.Worldwide about 1% of the population is diagnosed with schizophrenia and
approximately 1.2% of Americans, approx. 3.2 million, suffer from schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia can affect people throughout the lifespan, although new instances of
the illness are most likely to occur in early adulthood.During the early stage of schizophrenia,patients might not be aware 
of it themselves,if they have not been previously diagnosed with it. chizophrenia typically gradually proceeds until the person
breaks down and the inner psychotic state gets translated into outer action. Initial change in cognition and behavior: anxiety, restlessness and
hallucinations to small extent.

Even though schizophrenia is not curable, if it is identified at
an early stage, most of its symptoms can be controlled.

Goal of Our Study
Develop an automated system for detecting precursor markers that would act as a clue to doctors and direct them
to consider full diagnosis and treatment of schizophrenia.We wanted to take advantage of the eye movement discrepancy that
exists between the healthy controls and schizophrenic patients and use machine learning algorithms and classify
between the two groups.


The Deep Learning model used for this study was build following Stanford class CS231n offered by Dr. Fei Fei Li.
Completing the assignments and following the lecture notes will give though understanding.

                        Highly recommended for Machine Learning enthusiast! 







